.\" Copyright 2023 by Maury Markowitz
.\" 
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License V.2 as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with
.\" the RetroFOCAL distribution.

.TH RETROFOCAL 1 "1 January 2023" v1.0.0 "RetroFOCAL"
.LO 1

.SH NAME
.B retrofocal
\- run old FOCAL programs

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B retrofocal
.RB [ \-ghnpsuv ]
.RB [ \-a 1|0]
.RB [ \-t 
.IR num ]
.RB [ \-r 
.IR num ] 
.RB [ \-o 
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-i 
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-w 
.IR file ]
.I filename

.SH DESCRIPTION 
.B RetroFOCAL
is an interpreter designed to run programs written in the FOCAL language seen on DEC machines like the PDP-8. FOCAL programs must be in text format, not tokenized.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \--help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-v, \--version
Print version info and exit.
.TP
.B \-u, \--upper-case
Convert all input to upper-case, like using caps lock.
.TP
.BR \-a [1|0],
.BR \--array-base =[1/0]
Set the base index for arrays, normally 0 but some dialects use 1.
.TP
.BI \-t num,
.BI \--tabs
Sets the number of spaces for comma-separated items, defaults to 10 based on the Commodore PET.
.TP
.B \-g,
.B \--goto-next
Branches to a non-existant lines will continue on the next line, instead of raising an error.
.TP
.BI -r num
.BI --random num
Seed the random number generator, passing 0 causes it to randomize.
.TP
.B \-s,
.B \--slicing
Enable string slicing like HP, Integer, Atari, etc. Turning this on makes arrays of strings inaccessible.
.TP
.BI \-o filename,
.BI \--output-file filename
Redirect PRINT statement output to the named file.
.TP
.BI \-i filenme,
.BI \--input-file filenme
Redirect INPUT statements to read from the named file, one INPUT value per line.
.TP
.B \-n,
.B \--no-run
Do not run the BASIC program, simply parse it and exit.
.TP
.B \-p,
.B \--print-statistics
Print a selection of statistics to the console.
.TP
.BI \-w filename,
.BI \--write-statistics filename
Write the statistics to the named file in an alternative, system-readable format.

.SH GENERAL DESIGN
.B RetroFOCAL
is intended to run programs from written in the PDP-8 dialect of the FOCAL language. As FOCAL and BASIC are very similar, RetroFOCAL is based on the RetroBASIC program, greatly simplified. Where possible variations in dialect exist,
.B RetroFOCAL
always chooses to implement the instructions such that
.I The Sumer Game
and
.I Lunar Lander
run properly.

The original purpose of RetroBASIC was to collect statistics on common BASIC programs like
.I Super Star Trek.
This has been retained in
.B RetroFOCAL
. The statistics are collected during the parsing stage and can be printed out using the
.B \-p
option, or written to a named file with
.B \-w
.I filename.
If the statistics are all that is needed, add the
.B \-n
option, which parses the program and then immediately exits without running the program.

.B RetroFOCAL
may also be used for regression testing using the
.BR -r , -i and -o
options. The first seeds the random number generator to a given value so that subsequent runs will create the same series of events, the next reads inputs from a file recording previous interactive inputs, and the final one writes all output to another file. Diff'ing the resulting output from different versions of a program can be used to find changes.

.SH EXAMPLES

.B retrofocal -u ll.fc
\- play a game of Lunar Lander with caps lock turned on.

.B retrobasic -np sumer.fc
\- parse The Sumer Game, print statistics about the program structure, and exit.

.SH BUGS

ASK statements with multiple variables have to be entered on separate lines; most dialects allow these to be space delimited.

.SH AUTHORS

Maury Markowitz is the original author of RetroFOCAL. It is based on RetroBASIC which is based on gnbasic by James Bowman.
